## Autotuning and Heuristics

Kernel performance may be significantly impacted by implementation-specific
hyperparameters (e.g., tile sizes, layouts, etc.), known as Op Configs in
Tokamax. The optimal values for these configs must be empirically determined for
every input of interest, via *autotuning*. Tokamax provides a framework both to
perform autotuning, and to simplify the management of this process and its
outputs.

### High-level Overview

Every `tokamax.Op` implementation defines its set of tunable hyperparameters,
and the range of values each of those configs can assume, in
`tokamax.Op._get_autotuning_configs`
([example](https://github.com/openxla/tokamax/blob/d31b641c2c9986b092b8a8f993ff15799a3f08ce/tokamax/_src/ops/ragged_dot/pallas_mosaic_tpu.py#L421)).
The autotuner runs an exhaustive search across this space to identify the
configuration with the best performance (lowest execution time). The result may
be utilized in different ways: directly in your program as a context manager,
serialized and stored in your private cache for later use, or as part of the
global library-wide cache.

The optimal config for an op depends on the specific set of inputs used to
invoke the op, including shapes, dtypes, etc. The autotuning API accepts this list of
inputs in a variety of ways, and in all cases, outputs an
[`AutotuningResult`](https://github.com/openxla/tokamax/blob/d31b641c2c9986b092b8a8f993ff15799a3f08ce/tokamax/_src/autotuning/api.py#L75)
object that contains the best configurations for each op in the input.

### Autotuner Input Formats

#### Callable Function

Given a callable function of interest with one or more Tokamax Ops, the
autotuner uses StableHLO metadata to extract information about every Op and its
respective inputs, and autotunes each one.

```python
# Autotune all Tokamax kernels in f, which can be a JAX function with multiple Tokamax ops and non-Tokamax ops as well. Assume f takes a dictionary of args as input.
autotune_result: tokamax.AutotuningResult = tokamax.autotune(f, **args)
# Best possible result
with autotune_result:
    out_autotuned = f(**args)
```

Tokamax VJP ops may be implemented as their own Op class and have their own
search space and unique `_get_autotuning_configs.` Since the VJP ops do not have
a direct API that can be called for autotuning, you can take your forward
function and call `jax.grad` to obtain the pullback function with Tokamax VJP
ops, and then pass the pullback function into the autotuner.

```python
# This pullback function contains Tokamax VJP ops.
f_grad = jax.grad(f)
autotune_result = tokamax.autotune(f_grad)

with autotune_result:
  out = f_grad()
```

#### Sequence of `BoundArguments`

When a Tokamax Op is called with a set of input arguments, the op will first
"bind" to the arguments. This process canonicalizes and validates the inputs,
creating a `BoundArgument` object consisting of the op with its input arguments.
The autotuner can take in a sequence of `BoundArguments` as input, and autotunes
each one.

```python
ragged_dot_ba = tokamax.PallasMosaicTpuRaggedDot.bind(x, y, group)
attention_ba = tokamax.PallasMosaicTpuAttention.bind(q, k, v)

autotune_result: tokamax.AutotuningResult = tokamax.autotune([ragged_dot_ba, attention_ba])

with autotune_result:
  ...
```

#### Serialized List of `BoundArguments`

The script
[`xplane_to_bound_args.py`](https://github.com/openxla/tokamax/blob/main/tokamax/_src/tools/xplane_to_bound_args.py)
takes an xplane proto,
[generated by XProf](https://openxla.org/xprof/capturing_profiles) during
profiling runs, as input and outputs a JSON of `BoundArguments`. The
autotuner can read in this JSON file and autotune all the Tokamax Ops that
appear in the profile.

Suppose from profiling you have an xplane `my_model.xplane.pb`, you can extract
and autotune all the Tokamax ops used like this:

```shell
 python tokamax/_src/tools/xplane_to_bound_args.py \
   --xplane_file=my_model.xplane.pb \
   --output_file=/tmp/bound_args.json
```

```python
import tokamax

bound_args = tokamax.autotuning.bound_args_from_json("/tmp/bound_args.json")
autotune_result = tokamax.autotune(bound_args)
```

### Autotuner Output Usage

The autotuning process always returns an `AutotuningResult` object that contains
the best configurations for each op in the input. You may utilize that output in
different ways to suit your needs.

#### Context Manager

You may directly utilize the autotuning result as a context manager in your
code.

```python
# Autotune all Tokamax kernels in f, which can be a JAX function with multiple Tokamax ops and non-Tokamax ops as well. Assume f takes a dictionary of args as input.
autotune_result: tokamax.AutotuningResult = tokamax.autotune(f, **args)
# Best possible result
with autotune_result:
    out_autotuned = f(**args)
```

#### Serialized `AutotuningResult`

You may wish to serialize and reuse `autotune_result` for one of two reasons (1)
autotuning can be expensive in terms of compute time, depending on the size of
the search space (2) kernel execution times can be noisy, resulting in different
“best” choices in different runs, and may result in numerical non-determinism.

```python
autotune_result: tokamax.AutotuningResult = tokamax.autotune(f, **args)
autotune_result_json: str = autotune_result.dumps()
autotune_result = tokamax.AutotuningResult.loads(autotune_result_json)
with autotune_result:
    out_autotuned = f(**args)
```

Multiple AutotuningResult objects can also be merged together into a single
object, by reading the results in as a JSON string using `load`.

```python
autotune_result_1 = tokamax.AutotuningResult.load(path_to_file_1)
autotune_result_2 = tokamax.AutotuningResult.load(path_to_file_2)
merged_results = autotune_result_1 | autotune_result_2

with merged_results:
  ...
```
